This file contains information on Open Calphad (OC) version 4+

For general information please read the readme-general.pdf 

The installation and use of OC requires some general knowledge about
compilation and linking of software.  If you are not familiar with
such procedures please ask a local guru.  We who are providing this
software do not have time to answer such questions.  

If you want a thermodynamic software that can install itself and which
does not require any understanding of thermodynamics please contact a
commercial vendor.

In the list below the most recent changes come first.

2016.03.02 OC version 4.015: Some problems using save/read unformatted
corrected and I modified the calculation of the second derivaties for
a phase with an order/disorder transition.  This seems to improve the
convergence but more testing needed.

2016.02.24 OC version 4.014: I have fixed the dense option for the
grid minimizer (NOTE ionic liquid and charged crystalline phases has
no dense grid (yet)).  The SET STATUS PHASE command is slightly
changed.  If a user gives just a phase name and no specific
composition set all composition sets for that phase will be given the
new status.  A few other minor bugs fixed.  This should also work for
the OCASI/TQ interface.

2016.02.16 I reallize that the model package is still version 3, not 4
so I have changed it to 3.20 rather than 4.10, although the text
documentation still calls it version 4.  It is only the OC version
number that is 4.  GTP is still waiting for the complete revision that
I have hoped to do for several years...

2016.02.15 Some major and many minor changes to make OC work with a
multicomponent fuel simulation for CEA.  A large memory leak when
reading databases was also removed using valgrind.

2016.02.09 I have written a new gridminimizer which is easier to
understand and fine-tune than the one I wrote 4 years ago.  I am not
sure it is better but at least I can now vary the intervals between
the gridpoints.  

2016.01.31 I have added a simple volume model using two paramaters
V=V0(x)*exp(VA(x,T)) same as in TC but without the bulk modulus
parameter.  I have also modified the reading of TDB files to be more
compatible with TC. A number of small bugs fixed also and I must start
rewriting the grid minimizer.

2016.01.26 Corrected a severe bug in the gridminimizer for ionic
liquid.  Version 4 of OC is now finished and I will start in version 5.

2016.01.25 I have worked with the ordering models to prepare a
discussion with Roger Reed and his student.  I have problems
calculating the 2nd derivatives of the ordered phase "as disordered"
which causes a converge problem when I use the 4 sublattice model.  I
tried a fix but then the calculations did not converge for the 2
sublattice model so I must derive the correct expression for the 2nd
derivatives.  TC has also problems with the same cases.

2016.01.17 Fixed a bug calculating ionic liquid with interactions
between vacancies and neutrals and another bug that one could not use
STEP several times to have several curves.  Some fixes when reading
the TDB files also.

2016.01.09 Many small and large changes.  Reading TDB files has been
improved so it handles some more TYPE_DEFS and also parameters for
neutrals in the ionic liquid model and phases with a disordered phase
set better.  But it is still necessary to have the typ_defs in a
specific order (which is also acceptable to TC itself).  The
gridminimizer has some changes but if they are improvements I am not
sure.  A bug calculating excess parameters with neutrals in the ionic
liquid has been removed.

2016.01.04 Fixed a bug that the amount of the set of stable phases
generated by the grid minimizer were wrong when the number of atoms
varied a lot in the phases. 

2016.01.01 There is a new grid minimizer for the ionic liquid that
works well for the 15 component system.  It treats the cations and
anions separately to limit the number of gridpoints generated.  Some
progress also for writing the DAT file format.

2016.12.05 Problems calculating the equilibrium for a 15 component
system has required several small modifications to find the correct
results.  I have fixed a problem when a phase with charged species did
not need external phase balance because all cations and anions had the
same change.  I discovered a problem that deleted composition sets did
not restore the free list for phase_varres records.  That is not fixed
as it is a bit complicated.  Markus Piro has helped me to understand
the DAT format but that part is not yet finished.

2016.12.05 I have stated writing code for output in DAT
(ChemSage/Solgasmix) formats.  It is a bit complicated with the TDB
functions that can call each other and have different temperature
ranges.

2016.11.30 It is now possible to save (unformatted) several equilibria
and the assessment record.  It means OC now can save an assessment on
a file similar to the PAR file for PARROT.  It is possible to continue
the assessment from the saved file.  The NEW command does not remove
the assessment record, it gives a warning but it seems not to cause
problems.

2016.11.23 A new macro to test SAVE is included.  Many small changes
and bugixes in particular I now use the old WPACK storc/loadc routines
rather than a new feature in Fortran 2003/8 to allocating a character,
which is not avalable in GNU Fortran 4.8.  I have also fixed some
problems calculating dot derivatives.

2016.11.18 The unformatted save is now almost finished.  I can save
the static data structure except some minor things and the first
equilibrium record with all calculated results and read all back and
continue calculating.  The first use of this feature is to save copies
of assessments when one has several equilibria and also weights and
model parameters.

Later I will try to extend it also to save results from STEP and MAP
calculations but for that I probably have to use direct (random) files
as I may run out of memory.

2016.11.15 I have started implementing save unformatted/direct by
converting the Fortran datastructure to the old integer format and
then write that on a file.  So far elements, species and TP functions
can be saved.  I think this is an absolutely necessary feature in
order to use OC in assessments.

2016.11.03 A general cleanup, the old macro directories have been
removed and the macro files for version 4 are directly on the maros/
directory.  The reading of parameters from TDB and PDB files have been
made more flexible.  Some problems using the order/disorder model have
also been fixed.  Work on the OCASI subroutines is ongoing but not yet
finished.

Christophe Sigli has provided an update of his Scheil simulation and
was happy that the new LAPACK/BLAS routines made his calculations
faster.  I have also added a second F90 example using TQ.

2016.10.22 Several updates have been made for the new PDB database
format.  There is a separate documentation for that available at the
github repository SGTE-PDB.  The macro map12 use this format.

I have also added the Inden-Xiong magnetic model with the "effective"
magnetic moment and separate Curie and Neel temperatures.

2016.09.22 Small fix in SMP and some changes in the documentation.

2016.09.20 Hard work on updating the documentation, I have done all
except the step/map/plot which I want to edit like a paper and the
OCASI documentation where I have to write some new code.  I have
started writing installation guides for different OS with the help of
Philippe Zeller.

An environment variable OCHOME has been introduced and on the directory
indicated by this variable one should have the ochelp.hlp file and one
can have a start.OCM file that is executed when the program starts and
an OCHOME/database directory which is searched for TDB databases if
user start the database name with "ocbase/" or "ocbase\"

Whenever I find a something difficult to explain in the documentation
I try to change the code but that will affect other parts of the
documentation.  Updating OC and the documentation in parallel is a bit
like playing a piece of 4 handed piano music all alone.

2016.09.13 The amend phase command can now add a constant G to a phase.

2016.09.10 A major change of the numerics has been made.  Now LAPACK
and BLAS are used for all numerical operations.  This has decreased
the computation time with almost 20%.  I provide a subset of LAPACK
and BLAS with OC compiled without specific adjustments to your
hardware.  If you have access to a LAPACK and BLAS library fitted to
your hardware please replace compiling the file oclablas.F90 by your
own library.

There are changes in all files compiling and linking OC.  If you want
to use your own LAPACK and BLAS routines you must make additional
changes to link that library and also changes in the ocnum.F90 to use
that library.

There is now also a possibility to calculate the eigenvalues of the
stability matrix using using Q(phase) and if the lowest value is
negative it means the calculation represents an unstable equilibrium
inside the spinodal.  Some minor improvements of STEP and MAP has also
been made.

2016.08.29 It is now possible to define other components than the
elements and calculate.  However, quasi-binary and ternary are still
problematic.  But I think the OC datastructure is now stable.  Time to
implement the unformatted save/read command.  And all documentation...
The paper about OCASI has been accepted for publication.

2016.08.29 A new directory TQ4lib has been added with updates of the
OC/TQ application software interface.  As yet only one test program
for F90 and one for C++ has been updated.

2016.08.26 A profiling showed that the routine to invert the phase
matrix takes 25% of the calculation time.  A test has been made to use
LAPACK/BLAS and the time of calculation an equilibrium has decreased
almost 20%!  Additionally several minor things has been changed.

2016.08.22 The record gtp_phasetuple has been modified.  Originally it
had only two indices, the phase index and the composition set number.
Later it has been extended to include the phase location, index of the
result record and an index to higher composition sets.  Unfortunately
I named the phase index "phaseix" and the location "ixphase" and I
have messed up which is what myself several times.  So now I renamed
the phase location "lokph" and have made all necessary changes in the
OC code EXCEPT for OCASI/TQ.

Thus those who use the OCASI interface must test if they have any
problems.  There are several subroutines using the phase tuple in
OCASI and some of them may need modifications.  I will test OCASI as
soon as possible but the application software may also need changes.

2016.08.22 It is now possible to enter a new set of components but
there are some problems not yet solved, in parts of the code the
elements are still used, for example the size of the system is still
calculated as the number of moles of elements.  But I leave such
things until I am 69 years old.

2016.08.20 I have added the possibility to use expressions for
conditions on the total amount of an element.  It is sometimes
interesting to keep the ratio of the amounts of two elements fixed
when changing the overall composition.

2016.08.17 It is now possible to use parameter identifiers including
characters like & and # in expressions for symbols.  I have also added
in a macro file how to enter mobility data and calculate the matrix of
derivatives of the potentials, dmu_i/dx_j, needed to convert the
mobilities to diffusion coefficients.

2016.08.08 A major step to complete the OC software, P can be used as
variable and V can be set as condition, provided there are volume
data.  The macro step8 include some calculations with variable P.  A
complex bug with reference state also removed.  And probably new
added.

2016.08.06 Still adding some minor features and bugfixes.  I am
looking for some unexpected trouble occuring when P is variable.  The
big thing to implement next is user defined components.

2016.07.30 A number of small features added.  Isothermal ternary
diagrams have their invariants plotted.  One can select a point in a
phase diagram and add a text, by default the stable phases from an
equilibrium calculation at that point.  When plotting the constitution
of a phase all other phases are ignored, previously they added spurios
lines.  A bug when calculating the constitution of an ordered phase
for a given composition fixed.

2016.07.19 I have implemented that the MAP command checks if the
equilibrium at a node point is a global minimum and if not the line
leading to this nodepoint is inactivated and no exit lines generated.
With this change the map7 macro works (almost) perfectly (the isopleth
for the HSS steel).  Calculating isothermal sections are almost
finished, the plotting is still rudimentary but there is a test macro.
The next big thing is to save results on file.  And then 1000 minor
things to fix.

2016.07.13 I have decided that this update is now a prerelease of OC
version 4.

2016.07.10 With a lot of help from Jacques Lechelle and others the
mapping now seems to work much better, also the multicomponent
isopleths.  I have even started to think about how to calculate and
plot isothermal ternary diagrams.  But there are still things to fix
with the step command also.  And with assessments and with ...

2016.07.04 I have finally started to improve the calculation of phase
diagrams and this version has some significant improvements.  Main
changes has been to determine the step axis and length to avoid
problems. The mapping is still very fragile and depend a lot on the
starting point but now miscibility gaps are almost closed (Cr-Mo) and
the mapping can cross a congruent melting point (U-O).  I discovered
that most lines are calculated twice so I will remove that and
implement a global minimization at nodepoints to check they are
stable.  The isopleth calculations are also better but require global
tests.  I have tried to add a command AMEND LINE to remove lines that
are wrong but if one has made two or more maps it crashes.  I should
not delete mapnodes.

2016.06.17 A major revision of the datastructure has been made with
help of valgrind to avoid uninitiallized variables and memory leaks.
In particular the array eq_tpres was changed from pointer to
allocatable.  This had some unexpected consquences as the memory used
during step and map increased.  I do not really understand why.  But
it required that I improved the cleanup of memory for the NEW command
and I now delete all memory used to store equilibria during step/map.

A good consequence of this is that I can now run all macro files with
the same supermacro all.OCM, I do not run ot of memory any more.  I
also added that I do not store more than 1500 equilibria during
step/map, if more I must write results on a file which is still not
implemented.  This affects the step7.OCM macro which terminates due to
too many equilibria calculated.  So I have to implement save on
files... some time in the future.

2016.06.17 I have run valgrid on a few examples and found and
corrected several cases where uninitiated variables were used.  I also
found several cases of lost memory and I reallized I have to rethink a
bit about using pointers.  When I started writing OC I did not know
that one should never allocate pointer variables ... . But these
allocations are only in the static memory, they do not eat memory
while calculating.  Hopefully the code is a bit more stable.  And I
have to start fixing the problems with step and map.

2016.06.14 Most of the problems setting conditions on chemical
potentials in combination with other conditions should now be solved.
It is also possible to set a reference state.  There is a new macro
file for testing this.

2016.06.07 Some development for new STEP/MAP routines made but no real
improvements.  Fixed a bug setting chemical potentials together with
conditions on mole fractions.  There is still a bug changing the
reference state of a component.

2016.03.17 A rather complicated bug related to deleting redundant
phase tuples after an equilibrium calculation probably fixed.  It
occured for an FCC phase with a disordered fraction set.  In the macro
opttest2.OCM I have added an example of plotting an appended figure
with data.  I have also added a command "calulate phase ... const-adj"
to calculate the constitution of the phase when the mole fractions are
known.  It is mainly intended for OCASI applications.

2016.03.16 Some minor changes in all documentation files.  For
plotting there is now a possibility to APPEND a GNUPLOT command file
to be superimposed on a calculated diagram.  This should be useful for
assessments.  An attempt to implement the Flory-Huggins model for
polymers has been made but it is not finished.

2016.03.08 Some commands have been modified, set fixed and set
variable now accepts ranges of coefficients.  There is a command "list
opt coeff" which list just the coefficients.  You can specify an
abbreviated TP function name to be calculated.

2016.03.07 There are several problems entering TP functions, please be
careful and check the listing of the functions, the listing is true to
the way the function is calculated.  You cannot use
parentheses except around arguments to EXP and LOG and negative
powers.  Separate complicated functions in several functions.  Never have
more than two symbols multiplied together.

2016.02.12 Removed extention on linkmake and linkpara to make it easier
to rename these files.

2016.03.03 Fixed some errors when entering TP functions interactivly.
Modified slightly the listing of many equilibria.  Empty lines in the
enter_many_equil command and TAB characters the row lines accepted.

